doc/faq.rst, before:

.. _faq:

Frequently Asked Questions
==========================

Why is Glue crashing on startup?
--------------------------------
You might run into an error message like::

    Qt internal error: qt_menu.nib could not be loaded.
    The .nib file should be placed in QtGui.framework/Versions/Current/Resources/
    or in the resources directory of your application bundle.

This due to a quirk in Anaconda that requires that python GUIs be run with ``pythonw`` instead of ``python``. See :ref:`the installation page <pythonw_note>` about how to properly install Glue with Anaconda.

What data formats does Glue understand?
---------------------------------------
Glue relies on several libraries to parse different file formats:

 * `Astropy <http://www.astropy.org>`_ for FITS images and tables, a
   variety of `ascii table formats
   <http://docs.astropy.org/en/latest/io/ascii/index.html>`_, and VO
   tables.
 * `scikit-image <http://scikit-image.org/>`_ to read popular image
   formats like ``.jpeg`` and ``.tiff``
 * `h5py <http://www.h5py.org/docs/>`_ to read HDF5 files

If Glue's predefined data loaders don't fit your needs, ou can also :ref:`write your own <custom_data_factory>` loader, and plug it into Glue.


How do I overplot catalogs on images in Glue?
---------------------------------------------
Take a look at this video. For more details, consult the :ref:`tutorial <getting_started>`.

.. raw:: html

    <center>
    <iframe src="http://player.vimeo.com/video/54940097?badge=0" width="500" height="305" frameborder="0" webkitAllowFullScreen mozallowfullscreen allowFullScreen></iframe>
    </center>

How do I use Glue with the IPython notebook?
--------------------------------------------

For IPython version >= 1.0, Glue can be started from the IPython HTML
notebook without blocking, so that both the notebook and the Glue UI
can run at once. This requires starting the notebook such that it
cooperates with Qt. To do this, start the notebook with::

    ipython notebook --gui qt

And then starting glue (probably by calling :ref:`qglue <qglue>`) from the notebook.

If you encounter an error like this::

    ValueError: API 'QString' has already been set to version 1

set the ``QT_API`` environment variable to either ``pyqt`` or ``pyside``, depending on which version of Qt you have installed::

    QT_API=pyside notebook --gui qt


Does Glue Understand CASA Cubes?
--------------------------------
Many radio astronomy datacubes are 4 dimensional, and give intensity
as a function of 2 spatial dimensions, a frequency dimension, and a
Stokes polarization dimension. By default, Glue will read these images
in as 4D hypercubes.

However, you might wish to load the image as a series of 3D cubes,
one for each Stokes parameter. This would more easily allow you,
for example, to compare histograms of intensities for each Stokes
parameter.

Because of this, Glue has a special "CASA image loader", to load
these kinds of files. To open a file in this mode, select "CASA PPV Cube"
in the file type dropdown when opening a file. This will create a single
Data object with 1 attribute for each Stokes parameter.


Something is broken, or confusing. What should I do?
----------------------------------------------------
If you think you've found a bug in Glue, feel free to add
an issue to the `GitHub issues page <https://github.com/glue-viz/glue/issues?state=open>`_. If you have general questions, send us an `email <mailto:glue.viz@gmail.com>`_.

I have some other question...?
------------------------------
Send us an `email <mailto:glue.viz@gmail.com>`_.

Commit message:

Add mailing list link to docs

doc/faq.rst, after:

.. _faq:

Frequently Asked Questions
==========================

Why is Glue crashing on startup?
--------------------------------
You might run into an error message like::

    Qt internal error: qt_menu.nib could not be loaded.
    The .nib file should be placed in QtGui.framework/Versions/Current/Resources/
    or in the resources directory of your application bundle.

This due to a quirk in Anaconda that requires that python GUIs be run with ``pythonw`` instead of ``python``. See :ref:`the installation page <pythonw_note>` about how to properly install Glue with Anaconda.

What data formats does Glue understand?
---------------------------------------
Glue relies on several libraries to parse different file formats:

 * `Astropy <http://www.astropy.org>`_ for FITS images and tables, a
   variety of `ascii table formats
   <http://docs.astropy.org/en/latest/io/ascii/index.html>`_, and VO
   tables.
 * `scikit-image <http://scikit-image.org/>`_ to read popular image
   formats like ``.jpeg`` and ``.tiff``
 * `h5py <http://www.h5py.org/docs/>`_ to read HDF5 files

If Glue's predefined data loaders don't fit your needs, ou can also :ref:`write your own <custom_data_factory>` loader, and plug it into Glue.


How do I overplot catalogs on images in Glue?
---------------------------------------------
Take a look at this video. For more details, consult the :ref:`tutorial <getting_started>`.

.. raw:: html

    <center>
    <iframe src="http://player.vimeo.com/video/54940097?badge=0" width="500" height="305" frameborder="0" webkitAllowFullScreen mozallowfullscreen allowFullScreen></iframe>
    </center>

How do I use Glue with the IPython notebook?
--------------------------------------------

For IPython version >= 1.0, Glue can be started from the IPython HTML
notebook without blocking, so that both the notebook and the Glue UI
can run at once. This requires starting the notebook such that it
cooperates with Qt. To do this, start the notebook with::

    ipython notebook --gui qt

And then starting glue (probably by calling :ref:`qglue <qglue>`) from the notebook.

If you encounter an error like this::

    ValueError: API 'QString' has already been set to version 1

set the ``QT_API`` environment variable to either ``pyqt`` or ``pyside``, depending on which version of Qt you have installed::

    QT_API=pyside notebook --gui qt


Does Glue Understand CASA Cubes?
--------------------------------
Many radio astronomy datacubes are 4 dimensional, and give intensity
as a function of 2 spatial dimensions, a frequency dimension, and a
Stokes polarization dimension. By default, Glue will read these images
in as 4D hypercubes.

However, you might wish to load the image as a series of 3D cubes,
one for each Stokes parameter. This would more easily allow you,
for example, to compare histograms of intensities for each Stokes
parameter.

Because of this, Glue has a special "CASA image loader", to load
these kinds of files. To open a file in this mode, select "CASA PPV Cube"
in the file type dropdown when opening a file. This will create a single
Data object with 1 attribute for each Stokes parameter.


Something is broken, or confusing. What should I do?
----------------------------------------------------
If you think you've found a bug in Glue, feel free to add
an issue to the `GitHub issues page <https://github.com/glue-viz/glue/issues?state=open>`_. If you have general questions, feel free to post a message to the `Glue mailing list <https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/glue-viz>`_, or send us an `email <mailto:glue.viz@gmail.com>`_ directly.

You can also submit bug reports directly from Glue, by clicking ``Help->Send Feedback``. This also sends us some diagnostic information about your Glue installation.

I have some other question...?
------------------------------
Ask us a question on the `mailing list <https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/glue-viz>`_!
