doc/customizing_guide/toolbar.rst, before:

Custom tools for viewers and custom toolbars
============================================

Writing a custom tool for a viewer toolbar
------------------------------------------

Here we take a look at how to create a tool to include in a viewer's toolbar
(either one of the built-in viewers or a custom viewer) There are two types of
tools: ones that can be checked and unchecked, and ones that simply trigger an
event when pressed, but do not remain pressed. These are described in the
following two sub-sections.

Non-checkable tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The basic structure for a non-checkable tool is:

.. code:: python

    from glue.config import viewer_tool
    from glue.viewers.common.qt.tool import Tool

    @viewer_tool
    class MyCustomTool(Tool):

        icon = 'myicon.png'
        tool_id = 'custom_tool'
        action_text = 'Does cool stuff'
        tool_tip = 'Does cool stuff'
        shortcut = 'D'

        def __init__(self, viewer):
            super(MyCustomMode, self).__init__(viewer)

        def activate(self):
            pass

        def close(self):
            pass

The class-level variables set at the start of the class are as follows:

* ``icon``: this should be set either to the name of a built-in glue icon, or
  to the path to a PNG file to be used for the icon. Note that this should
  **not** be a ``QIcon`` object.

* ``tool_id``: a unique string that identifies this tool. If you create a
  tool that has the same ``tool_id`` as an existing tool already implemented in
  glue, you will get an error.

* ``action_text``: a string describing the tool. This is shown in the status bar
  at the bottom of the viewer whenever the button is active.

* ``tool_tip``: this should be a string that will be shown when the user hovers
  above the button in the toolbar. This can include instructions on how to use
  the tool.

* ``shortcut``: this should be a string giving a key that the user can press
  when the viewer is active, which will activate the tool. This can include
  modifier keys, e.g. ``'Ctrl+A'`` or ``'Ctrl+Shift+U'``, but can also just be
  a single key, e.g. ``'K'``. If present, the shortcut is added at the end of
  the tooltip. If multiple tools in a viewer have the same shortcut, a warning
  will be emitted, and only the first tool registered with a particular
  shortcut will be accessible with that shortcut.

When the user presses the tool icon, the ``activate`` method is called. In this
method, you can write any code including code that may for example open a Qt
window, or change the state of the viewer (for example changing the zoom or
field of view). You can access the viewer instance with ``self.viewer``.
Finally, when the viewer is closed the ``close`` method is called, so you should
use this to do any necessary cleanup.

The ``@viewer_tool`` decorator tells glue that this class represents a viewer
tool, and you will then be able to add the tool to any viewers (see
:ref:`toolbar_content`) using the ``tool_id``.

Checkable tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The basic structure for a checkable tool is similar to the above, but with an
additional ``deactivate`` method:

.. code:: python

    from glue.config import viewer_tool
    from glue.viewers.common.qt.tool import CheckableTool

    @viewer_tool
    class MyCustomButton(CheckableTool):

        icon = 'myicon.png'
        tool_id = 'custom_tool'
        action_text = 'Does cool stuff'
        tool_tip = 'Does cool stuff'
        shortcut = 'D'

        def __init__(self, viewer):
            super(MyCustomMode, self).__init__(viewer)

        def activate(self):
            pass

        def deactivate(self):
            pass

        def close(self):
            pass

When the tool icon is pressed, the ``activate`` method is called, and when the
button is unchecked (either by clicking on it again, or if the user clicks on
another tool icon), the ``deactivate`` method is called. As before, when the
viewer is closed, the ``close`` method is called.

Drop-down menus
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For both checkable and non-checkable tools, it is possible to show a menu
when the user clicks on the icon. To do this, simply add a ``menu_actions``
method to your class:

.. code:: python

    def menu_actions(self):
        return []

This method should return a list of ``QActions`` which can include e.g. icons,
text, and callbacks.

.. note:: In future, we will allow this to be done in a way that
          does not rely on Qt QActions.

.. _toolbar_content:

Customizing the content of a toolbar
------------------------------------

When defining a tool as above, the ``@viewer_tool`` decorator ensures that
the tool is registered with glue, but does not add it to any specific viewer.
Which buttons are shown for a viewer is controlled by the ``tools`` class-level
attribute on viewers:

.. code:: python

    >>> from glue.viewers.image.qt import ImageWidget
    >>> ImageWidget.tools
    ['select:rectangle', 'select:xrange', 'select:yrange',
     'select:circle', 'select:polygon', 'image:colormap']

The strings in the ``tools`` list correspond to the ``tool_id`` attribute on the
tool classes. If you want to add an existing or custom button to a viewer, you
can therefore simply do e.g.:

.. code:: python

    from glue.viewers.image.qt import ImageWidget
    ImageWidget.tools.append('custom_tool')

Including toolbars in custom viewers
------------------------------------

When defining a data viewer (as described in :doc:`full_custom_qt_viewer`), it
is straightforward to add a toolbar that can then be used to add tools. To do
this, when defining your
:class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.data_viewer.DataViewer` subclass,
you should also specify the ``_toolbar_cls`` and ``tools`` class-level
attributes, which should give the class to use for the toolbar, and the default
tools that should be present in the toolbar:

.. code:: python

    from glue.viewers.common.qt.data_viewer import DataViewer
    from glue.viewers.common.qt.toolbar import BasicToolbar

    class MyViewer(DataViewer):

        _toolbar_cls = BasicToolbar
        tools = ['custom_tool']

In the example above, the viewer will include an toolbar with one tool (the one
we defined above). There are currently two main classes available for toolbars:

* :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.toolbar.BasicToolbar`: this is the most basic
  kind of toolbar - it comes with no tools by default.

* :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mpl_toolbar.MatplotlibViewerToolbar`: this is
  a subclass of :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.toolbar.BasicToolbar` that
  includes the standard Matplotlib buttons by default (home, zoom, pan, etc.).
  This toolbar can only be used if your data viewer includes a Matplotlib canvas
  accessible at ``viewer.canvas``.

Available tools
---------------

The following tools are available by default (note that not all tools can be
used in all viewers, click on each tool class name to find out more):

======================  ========================================================
Tool ID                 Class
======================  ========================================================
``'select:circle'``     :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.CircleMode`
``'select:lasso'``      :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.LassoMode`
``'select:pick'``       :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.PickMode`
``'select:polygon'``    :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.PolyMode`
``'select:rectangle'``  :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.RectangleMode`
``'select:xrange'``     :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.HRangeMode`
``'select:yange'``      :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.VRangeMode`
``'image:colormap'``    :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.ColormapMode`
``'image:contrast'``    :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.ContrastMode`
======================  ========================================================

Commit message:

Make toolbars be initialized after DataViewer.__init__ is executed.
This uses a metaclass for DataViewer, which in turn needs the noconflict module which defines a class maker that avoids issues due to the fact that DataViewer has multiple inheritance, and one of the classes is from Qt.

doc/customizing_guide/toolbar.rst, after:

Custom tools for viewers and custom toolbars
============================================

Writing a custom tool for a viewer toolbar
------------------------------------------

Here we take a look at how to create a tool to include in a viewer's toolbar
(either one of the built-in viewers or a custom viewer) There are two types of
tools: ones that can be checked and unchecked, and ones that simply trigger an
event when pressed, but do not remain pressed. These are described in the
following two sub-sections.

Non-checkable tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The basic structure for a non-checkable tool is:

.. code:: python

    from glue.config import viewer_tool
    from glue.viewers.common.qt.tool import Tool

    @viewer_tool
    class MyCustomTool(Tool):

        icon = 'myicon.png'
        tool_id = 'custom_tool'
        action_text = 'Does cool stuff'
        tool_tip = 'Does cool stuff'
        shortcut = 'D'

        def __init__(self, viewer):
            super(MyCustomMode, self).__init__(viewer)

        def activate(self):
            pass

        def close(self):
            pass

The class-level variables set at the start of the class are as follows:

* ``icon``: this should be set either to the name of a built-in glue icon, or
  to the path to a PNG file to be used for the icon. Note that this should
  **not** be a ``QIcon`` object.

* ``tool_id``: a unique string that identifies this tool. If you create a
  tool that has the same ``tool_id`` as an existing tool already implemented in
  glue, you will get an error.

* ``action_text``: a string describing the tool. This is shown in the status bar
  at the bottom of the viewer whenever the button is active.

* ``tool_tip``: this should be a string that will be shown when the user hovers
  above the button in the toolbar. This can include instructions on how to use
  the tool.

* ``shortcut``: this should be a string giving a key that the user can press
  when the viewer is active, which will activate the tool. This can include
  modifier keys, e.g. ``'Ctrl+A'`` or ``'Ctrl+Shift+U'``, but can also just be
  a single key, e.g. ``'K'``. If present, the shortcut is added at the end of
  the tooltip. If multiple tools in a viewer have the same shortcut, a warning
  will be emitted, and only the first tool registered with a particular
  shortcut will be accessible with that shortcut.

When the user presses the tool icon, the ``activate`` method is called. In this
method, you can write any code including code that may for example open a Qt
window, or change the state of the viewer (for example changing the zoom or
field of view). You can access the viewer instance with ``self.viewer``.
Finally, when the viewer is closed the ``close`` method is called, so you should
use this to do any necessary cleanup.

The ``@viewer_tool`` decorator tells glue that this class represents a viewer
tool, and you will then be able to add the tool to any viewers (see
:ref:`toolbar_content`) using the ``tool_id``.

Checkable tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The basic structure for a checkable tool is similar to the above, but with an
additional ``deactivate`` method:

.. code:: python

    from glue.config import viewer_tool
    from glue.viewers.common.qt.tool import CheckableTool

    @viewer_tool
    class MyCustomButton(CheckableTool):

        icon = 'myicon.png'
        tool_id = 'custom_tool'
        action_text = 'Does cool stuff'
        tool_tip = 'Does cool stuff'
        shortcut = 'D'

        def __init__(self, viewer):
            super(MyCustomMode, self).__init__(viewer)

        def activate(self):
            pass

        def deactivate(self):
            pass

        def close(self):
            pass

When the tool icon is pressed, the ``activate`` method is called, and when the
button is unchecked (either by clicking on it again, or if the user clicks on
another tool icon), the ``deactivate`` method is called. As before, when the
viewer is closed, the ``close`` method is called.

Drop-down menus
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For both checkable and non-checkable tools, it is possible to show a menu
when the user clicks on the icon. To do this, simply add a ``menu_actions``
method to your class:

.. code:: python

    def menu_actions(self):
        return []

This method should return a list of ``QActions`` which can include e.g. icons,
text, and callbacks.

.. note:: In future, we will allow this to be done in a way that
          does not rely on Qt QActions.

.. _toolbar_content:

Customizing the content of a toolbar
------------------------------------

When defining a tool as above, the ``@viewer_tool`` decorator ensures that
the tool is registered with glue, but does not add it to any specific viewer.
Which buttons are shown for a viewer is controlled by the ``tools`` class-level
attribute on viewers:

.. code:: python

    >>> from glue.viewers.image.qt import ImageWidget
    >>> ImageWidget.tools
    ['select:rectangle', 'select:xrange', 'select:yrange',
     'select:circle', 'select:polygon', 'image:colormap']

The strings in the ``tools`` list correspond to the ``tool_id`` attribute on the
tool classes. If you want to add an existing or custom button to a viewer, you
can therefore simply do e.g.:

.. code:: python

    from glue.viewers.image.qt import ImageWidget
    ImageWidget.tools.append('custom_tool')

Including toolbars in custom viewers
------------------------------------

When defining a data viewer (as described in :doc:`full_custom_qt_viewer`), it
is straightforward to add a toolbar that can then be used to add tools. To do
this, when defining your
:class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.data_viewer.DataViewer` subclass,
you should also specify the ``_toolbar_cls`` and ``tools`` class-level
attributes, which should give the class to use for the toolbar, and the default
tools that should be present in the toolbar:

.. code:: python

    from glue.viewers.common.qt.data_viewer import DataViewer
    from glue.viewers.common.qt.toolbar import BasicToolbar

    class MyViewer(DataViewer):

        _toolbar_cls = BasicToolbar
        tools = ['custom_tool']

In the example above, the viewer will include an toolbar with one tool (the one
we defined above). There are currently two main classes available for toolbars:

* :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.toolbar.BasicToolbar`: this is the most basic
  kind of toolbar - it comes with no tools by default.

* :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mpl_toolbar.MatplotlibViewerToolbar`: this is
  a subclass of :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.toolbar.BasicToolbar` that
  includes the standard Matplotlib buttons by default (home, zoom, pan, etc.).
  This toolbar can only be used if your data viewer includes a Matplotlib canvas
  accessible at ``viewer.canvas``.

Note that the toolbar is set up after ``__init__`` has run. Therefore, if you
want to do any custom set-up to the toolbar after it has been set up, you
should overload the ``initialize_toolbar`` method, e.g:

.. code:: python

    class MyViewer(DataViewer):

        _toolbar_cls = BasicToolbar
        tools = ['custom_tool']

        def initialize_toolbar(self):
            super(MyViewer, self).initialize_toolbar()
            # custom code here

In ``initialize_toolbar`` (and elsewhere in the class) you can then access the
tool instances using ``self.toolbar.tools`` (which is a dictionary where each
key is a ``tool_id``).

Available tools
---------------

The following tools are available by default (note that not all tools can be
used in all viewers, click on each tool class name to find out more):

======================  ========================================================
Tool ID                 Class
======================  ========================================================
``'select:circle'``     :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.CircleMode`
``'select:lasso'``      :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.LassoMode`
``'select:pick'``       :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.PickMode`
``'select:polygon'``    :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.PolyMode`
``'select:rectangle'``  :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.RectangleMode`
``'select:xrange'``     :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.HRangeMode`
``'select:yange'``      :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.VRangeMode`
``'image:colormap'``    :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.ColormapMode`
``'image:contrast'``    :class:`~glue.viewers.common.qt.mouse_mode.ContrastMode`
======================  ========================================================
