doc/whatsnew/0.11.rst, before:

:orphan:

.. _whatsnew_011:

What's new in glue v0.11?
=========================

The v0.11 release of glue includes a number of exciting new features and
improvements, so let's take a look at what's new!

New Slack community
-------------------

We have now set up Slack for any glue help/discussions, and we encourage you to
sign up! You will need to first get an account `here
<https://glueviz-slack-invite.herokuapp.com>`_ after which you will be able to
sign in to http://glueviz.slack.com.

Installing/updating
-------------------

Before we get started, here's a reminder on how to install/update glue. You can
easily update glue if you are using Anaconda/Miniconda by doing::

    conda install -c glueviz glueviz

If instead you installed glue with pip, you can update with::

    pip install glueviz[all] --upgrade

Improved interface
------------------

The main interface of the application has been improved, and now features a
toolbar at the top with quick access to common functionality, as well as a
clearer link to the error console (which replaces the square in the bottom right
of the interface).

.. image:: images/v0.11/application_ui.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 900

We've also done a lot of work to improve the layout of many of the option
widgets, fixing font sizes, and so on. We hope you like the updated interface!

New built-in viewers
--------------------

The built-in histogram, scatter, and image viewers have now been completely
re-written and now include new functionality. For example, the scatter viewer
now includes the ability to color-code or resize points based on another
attribute (this was previously possible in the 3D scatter viewer only):

.. image:: images/v0.11/scatter_color_size.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 700

The scatter viewer now also includes the ability to show symmetric error bars in
the x and/or y direction.

.. image:: images/v0.11/scatter_error.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 700

Finally, this viewer also allows you to plot the data using a continuous line
rather than individual points.

The image viewer has also seen an overhaul - the main change in user experience
is that multi-color images are now made via layers instead of using a special
RGB mode, and any number of images can be combined using an arbitrary number of
colormaps or colors, rather than being restricted to RGB colors:

.. image:: images/v0.11/image_rgb.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 700

Subset mask importers and exporters
-----------------------------------

While it was already possible to export data subsets as actual subsets of the
data, it is now possible to import and export the boolean masks for subsets.
At the moment, there is only built-in support for importing/exporting from
FITS files, but defining new importers/exporters can easily be done, as
described in :ref:`custom_subset_mask_importer` and
:ref:`custom_subset_mask_exporter`. In future, we will add built-in support
for a wider range of file formats.

Performance improvements
------------------------

This release includes a number of significant performance improvements. For
example, there should now no longer be any delays when setting up links, and
selections should propagate between viewers more efficiently.

Experimental WorldWide Telescope plugin
---------------------------------------

We have developed a plugin that provides a `WorldWide Telescope (WWT)
<http://worldwidetelescope.org>`_ viewer inside glue:

.. image:: images/v0.11/plugin_wwt.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 900

To use this viewer, you
will need to install the `glue-wwt <https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-wwt>`_
plugin, using::

    conda install -c glueviz glue-wwt

if you use conda, or::

    pip install glue-wwt

otherwise. This viewer is experimental and is still missing a number of
features. For example, it can only be used to show datasets that have RA/Dec
columns (not other types of coordinates). Please report any issues or feature
requests `here <https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-wwt/issues>`__.

Experimental geospatial plugin
------------------------------

We have developed a plugin that provides a data factory which uses the
`rasterio <https://github.com/mapbox/rasterio>`_ package to read geospatial
raster data. This includes reading in the coordinate system and showing
longitude/latitude lines in image viewers, and also allows longitude/latitude
scatter data to be overplotted:

.. image:: images/v0.11/plugin_geospatial.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 700

To use this, you will need to install the `glue-geospatial
<https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-geospatial>`_ plugin, using::

    conda install -c glueviz glue-geospatial

if you use conda, or::

    pip install glue-geospatial

otherwise.

This plugin is experimental, and if you run into any issues or would like to
see new features, please open an issue `here
<https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-geospatial>`__.

Non-backward-compatible changes
-------------------------------

If you programmatically create viewers from Python scripts, if you currently set
attributes on viewers, you will need to update this code if using the built-in
histogram, scatter, or image viewers. Attributes are now set using a ``state``
attribute on the viewers. For example to set the ``x`` attribute on the scatter
plot viewer, you should set ``viewer.state.x_att`` instead of ``viewer.xatt``.
See the :ref:`programmatic` section for more details.

New conda glueviz channel
-------------------------

We now provide our own conda channel called ``glueviz`` (rather than using
conda-forge), which should help alleviate installation issues some users have
reported in the past. This channel contains the stable versions of glue and
various plugin packages.

Note that it is also possible to install the latest developer version from the
``glueviz/label/dev`` channel, though be aware that while you will get the
latest cutting-edge features, you may also be more prone to bugs/breakage.

Full list of Changes
--------------------

In addition to the above features, a number of bugs has been fixed since the
last release, and a few other small features have been added. A full list of
changes can be found in the
`CHANGES.md <https://github.com/glue-viz/glue/blob/master/CHANGES.md>`_ file

Commit message:

Updated section related to backward-incompatible changes in 'what's new', and improve terminology in programmatic viewer access docs

doc/whatsnew/0.11.rst, after:

:orphan:

.. _whatsnew_011:

What's new in glue v0.11?
=========================

The v0.11 release of glue includes a number of exciting new features and
improvements, so let's take a look at what's new!

New Slack community
-------------------

We have now set up Slack for any glue help/discussions, and we encourage you to
sign up! You will need to first get an account `here
<https://glueviz-slack-invite.herokuapp.com>`_ after which you will be able to
sign in to http://glueviz.slack.com.

Installing/updating
-------------------

Before we get started, here's a reminder on how to install/update glue. You can
easily update glue if you are using Anaconda/Miniconda by doing::

    conda install -c glueviz glueviz

If instead you installed glue with pip, you can update with::

    pip install glueviz[all] --upgrade

Improved interface
------------------

The main interface of the application has been improved, and now features a
toolbar at the top with quick access to common functionality, as well as a
clearer link to the error console (which replaces the square in the bottom right
of the interface).

.. image:: images/v0.11/application_ui.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 900

We've also done a lot of work to improve the layout of many of the option
widgets, fixing font sizes, and so on. We hope you like the updated interface!

New built-in viewers
--------------------

The built-in histogram, scatter, and image viewers have now been completely
re-written and now include new functionality. For example, the scatter viewer
now includes the ability to color-code or resize points based on another
attribute (this was previously possible in the 3D scatter viewer only):

.. image:: images/v0.11/scatter_color_size.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 700

The scatter viewer now also includes the ability to show symmetric error bars in
the x and/or y direction.

.. image:: images/v0.11/scatter_error.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 700

Finally, this viewer also allows you to plot the data using a continuous line
rather than individual points.

The image viewer has also seen an overhaul - the main change in user experience
is that multi-color images are now made via layers instead of using a special
RGB mode, and any number of images can be combined using an arbitrary number of
colormaps or colors, rather than being restricted to RGB colors:

.. image:: images/v0.11/image_rgb.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 700

Subset mask importers and exporters
-----------------------------------

While it was already possible to export data subsets as actual subsets of the
data, it is now possible to import and export the boolean masks for subsets.
At the moment, there is only built-in support for importing/exporting from
FITS files, but defining new importers/exporters can easily be done, as
described in :ref:`custom_subset_mask_importer` and
:ref:`custom_subset_mask_exporter`. In future, we will add built-in support
for a wider range of file formats.

Performance improvements
------------------------

This release includes a number of significant performance improvements. For
example, there should now no longer be any delays when setting up links, and
selections should propagate between viewers more efficiently.

Experimental WorldWide Telescope plugin
---------------------------------------

We have developed a plugin that provides a `WorldWide Telescope (WWT)
<http://worldwidetelescope.org>`_ viewer inside glue:

.. image:: images/v0.11/plugin_wwt.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 900

To use this viewer, you
will need to install the `glue-wwt <https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-wwt>`_
plugin, using::

    conda install -c glueviz glue-wwt

if you use conda, or::

    pip install glue-wwt

otherwise. This viewer is experimental and is still missing a number of
features. For example, it can only be used to show datasets that have RA/Dec
columns (not other types of coordinates). Please report any issues or feature
requests `here <https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-wwt/issues>`__.

Experimental geospatial plugin
------------------------------

We have developed a plugin that provides a data factory which uses the
`rasterio <https://github.com/mapbox/rasterio>`_ package to read geospatial
raster data. This includes reading in the coordinate system and showing
longitude/latitude lines in image viewers, and also allows longitude/latitude
scatter data to be overplotted:

.. image:: images/v0.11/plugin_geospatial.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 700

To use this, you will need to install the `glue-geospatial
<https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-geospatial>`_ plugin, using::

    conda install -c glueviz glue-geospatial

if you use conda, or::

    pip install glue-geospatial

otherwise.

This plugin is experimental, and if you run into any issues or would like to
see new features, please open an issue `here
<https://github.com/glue-viz/glue-geospatial>`__.

Backward-incompatible changes
-----------------------------

If you programmatically create viewers from Python scripts, if you currently set
attributes on viewers, you will need to update this code if using the built-in
histogram, scatter, or image viewers.

The main change is that the viewer classes have been renamed as follows:

* ``ScatterWidget`` is now ``ScatterViewer``
* ``ImageWidget`` is now ``ImageViewer``
* ``HistogramWidget`` is now ``HistogramViewer``
* ``TableWidget`` is now ``TableViewer``

In addition, attributes related to the visualization are no longer set directly
on the viewer object but instead using a ``state`` attribute on the viewers. For
example to set the ``x`` attribute on the scatter plot viewer, you should set::

    >>> viewer.state.x_att = ...

instead of::

    >>> viewer.xatt = ...

The motivation for this change is that the ``state`` object is a new object that
represents the state of the viewer in a GUI-framework-independent way, and is a
cleaner way to encapsulate all the information needed to control the
visualization. See the :ref:`programmatic` section for more details.

New conda glueviz channel
-------------------------

We now provide our own conda channel called ``glueviz`` (rather than using
conda-forge), which should help alleviate installation issues some users have
reported in the past. This channel contains the stable versions of glue and
various plugin packages.

Note that it is also possible to install the latest developer version from the
``glueviz/label/dev`` channel, though be aware that while you will get the
latest cutting-edge features, you may also be more prone to bugs/breakage.

Full list of Changes
--------------------

In addition to the above features, a number of bugs has been fixed since the
last release, and a few other small features have been added. A full list of
changes can be found in the
`CHANGES.md <https://github.com/glue-viz/glue/blob/master/CHANGES.md>`_ file
